Performing Beyond One's Ability, V1

This document describes a practical technique for utilizing more of our latent mental capabilities, seemingly in excess of natural ability. I explain why I think it works, in non-mystical terms, plus some things to know and be cautious about. Later, I throw in a few tips and some reference material.

I offer no proofs,merely assertions. Anyone who is interested can easily look up the terminology using the internet and try some experiments. I know it works. I use it all the time.

I use it for computer programming in system design and code debugging. I also use it when bicycling to solve the problem of not crashing -- which could be catastrophic seeing as I am a geezer and love riding my bike down steep hills at night while wearing black. And I use it to form hypotheses and conspiracy theories. For example, I can now provide a very plausible theory of how "The Great Reset" might actually be implemented in spite of the fact that a large majority of regular people "Do Not Want!" when it is explained to them what the billionaires, the globalist elites and socialists like AOC want to do for to them.

* * *

In short: we can use what psychologists call "Mindfulness" simultaneously with what they call "Flow" (and others call "The Zone", "The Realm" or "The Void".) So, I call it "Mindfulness+Flow".

Let's get practical. Suppose a vexing problem must be solved. And suppose that we are already familiar with the subject matter, and that we have a mental model of the rules of how things work and how the parts fit together. (The mental model need not be perfect or fully detailed in order to begin.)

First, breathe in, breathe out. Relax the mind, and calmly but intently focus on the problem to be solved. Ponder and examine it from every angle. Continue concentrating on the problem in the context of the mental model of the subject matter until a Flow state is achieved. At this point awareness of the "real" world, of time's passage, and one's self disappears; consciousness is transported into the virtual reality of the problem space. Nothing else exists. We are in a different Universe.

Now, try to solve the problem while remaining in the Flow. Think about it and visualize the solution, how the parts need to fit together, and which steps to perform in which order. If the answer does not appear, next try to solve the problem using Mindfulness *within* the Flow state: while keeping the problem in the center of attention -- the Mind's Eye -- and remaining calm and cool, fearless, without anxiety or urgency, slightly *defocus* attention from the problem and allow awareness to expand to include the whole mental model of the subject matter but still keeping the problem in the center of the mind.

Maintain this combination of Mindfulness+Flow and allow the mind to roam freely -- without volition or direction -- around, under and over the problem and all possible solutions. Continue in this manner for as long as necessary to find a solution, or until ejected from the Flow by sleepiness or a feeling of confusion -- or perhaps the body demanding attention. This can also be done in bed prior to sleep. It is permissible. Whatever works! Now...

Now, in the case of sleepiness, a likely cause is failure to fully understand some word or concept in the subject matter or problem specification. Retreat to the "real" world and review matters. Think deeply and study them until there is perfect recall of the relevant facts and the fundamental definitions.

In the case where confusion is felt, that may mean that the mental model is too incomplete, or is faulty, or is incompatible with the problem to be solved. Go back to the real world and try to explain the problem differently. Perhaps the problem is really two different problems, or it is not well defined. Break it down into simpler words! Draw a diagram. Or, try to explain it to someone else. Go for a long walk.

Now...if the mind did come up with an answer then it will also produce a feeling of satisfaction, excitement or happiness. Learn to recognize these feelings as indicators of success.

There may be only a glimmer of an answer, one which requires more work. That is common. And the solution may be sub-optimal. Or it might be slightly wrong. Don't worry about that. Try it out and see what happens. Sometimes it is necessary to do something wrong a few times. Like Edison with the light bulb. Creativity and invention are iterative processes. Never forget that for each Truth uncovered, several more are buried underneath; there is no Ending. And, after a solution is found, consider going back into Mindfulness+Flow to see if there is a better solution! Regardless, always test the answer.

* * *

Ok. Several questions arise. Is Mindfulness+Flow a new way of thinking? How does it work? Can it be improved? Can everyone do this?

First, it is likely that most people already have this ability and use it from time to time without being conscious of the fact. My contribution is to describe a practical, systematic method for invoking this mode of thought.

Second: why does Mindfulness+Flow work? One explanation is that our working memory restricts the number of things we can think about simultaneously. For complex problems with thousands or quintillions of possible configurations and scenarios, we simply cannot do the work consciously -- if at all -- without resorting to pencil and paper or a computer. By going into a state of Mindfulness within a state of Flow we allow the mind to shuffle through and examine the possible answer configurations -- and to pop likely candidates into our awareness. The mind can do this sorting and shuffling much faster if we are not consciously interfering and obstructing it with emotions and opinions. An alternative but highly speculative explanation of why Mindfulness+Flow works is that it involves neural quantum computations involving infinite copies of you in nearby parallel universes. I won't go into that here ... you're probably not ready for that...but yes, it's a real thing.

Can Mindfulness+Flow be improved? I believe that with practice a person should be able to use it more effectively. This is an area of inquiry.

* * *

Things to beware of:

1) Flow can be dangerous because the body is ignored throughout the process. It may be very wise to set a timer for, say, 45 minutes, and then get up and walk around or do some calisthenics.

2) Flow can be addictive, and can easily turn into what psychologists call Hyperfocus. Desire can become obsession. It is possible to fall into a trap that lasts for years or decades. A person might come to his senses and realize that the wrong path was taken -- and that there is no time left for a do-over. On the other hand, major "real world" problems can require years of focused concentration and dawn-to-dusk labor. Nothing is free: if you want the ultimate you have to pay the ultimate price. TANSTAAFL.

3) Don't spend time worrying about things that are out of one's control -- and especially not that another person's abilities are superior. Even if that were true it is totally irrelevant to solving the problem at hand. *You* can do it!

* * *

A cynical and judgmental reader might be asking, "You sound like a delusional megalomaniac! What makes you think *you* can explain creativity?Performing beyond ability is impossible!"

Well, he didn't mention my other faults. And I will also admit to solipsism :-)

This technique, Mindfulness+Flow, works in my Universe. Beyond that, I think people have been doing this for thousands of years. What I am attempting is to rationalize it so that all of us can use it and make it work...better... in our own lives.

Mindfulness+Flow could be called a form of non-linear reasoning. Chapters 1 through 3 of the "Wen Fu" (The Art Of Writing) by Lu Chi (261 A.D.) describe the individual parts of Mindfulness+Flow, though not the "defocusing" step explicitly. Per "Fair Use" here is a brief excerpt from Sam Hamill's translation:

The Early Motion

The poet stands at the centre of the universe contemplating the Enigma. He draws sustenance from the masterpieces of the past.

Studying the four seasons as they pass, he sighs. Seeing the inter-connectedness of things, he knows the many ways of the world.

[...]

II. Beginning

Eyes closed, he hears an inner music; he is lost in thoughts and questions --

His spirit rides to the eight corners of the universe, his mind a thousand miles away.

[...]

The morning blossoms bloom; soon the night buds will unfold.

He sees past and present commingle; he sees the whole Four Seas in the single blink of an eye.

[...]

III. Choosing Words

He chooses from among his ideas and orders his thoughts; he considers his words with great care and fits them with a sense of defined proportion.

Shadowy thoughts are brought into the light of reason; echoes are traced to their sources.

[...]

He calms his mind's deep waters; he collects from deep thoughts the proper names for things.

[...]

Sometimes the words come easily; sometimes he sits in silence gnawing at his brush.

* * *

Tips for Elementary Mindfulness+Flow:

"Mindfulness" is no big deal. Just relax the mind; breathe in, and breathe out. Allow thoughts to surface and pass by without judgement or attachment like fish in an aquarium. To begin, try counting breaths and use a bit of auto-suggestion: start counting at one and believe that when ten is reached the mind will be very calm. If an emotion is felt, just accept that it exists and let it go for now. This is very easy. Eventually one will be able to calm the mind instantly -- except perhaps in situations involving an adrenaline rush or great discomfort. It isn't necessary to sit in a Lotus or to feel religious or spiritual. Unless you want to. Mindfulness is neurobiological, not mystical.

"Flow" may be more difficult to achieve. Typically it would involve something one enjoys doing or thinking about and knows very well. And it would probably involve something desired very much -- an implacable, persistent desire that will not quit. Flow is something like a fascination, an ensorcelling or a rapture that transports the mind into another realm. Psychologists say it involves a loss of "reflective self-awareness" and sense of time. It is also reminiscent of Alfred Jarry's Pataphysics: "... pataphysics as an idea that 'the virtual or imaginary nature of things as glimpsed by the heightened vision of poetry or science or love can be seized and lived as real.'" (from the Wikipedia article).

As a practical matter for the beginner who is unfamiliar with the experience, Flow is recognized after it ends. Don't worry about being in it or not, just focus on the problem at hand!

One way to experience Flow is with a good book; something interesting and pleasant with likable characters. Begin reading slowly and think carefully about each sentence -- every word -- and visualize everything that is happening in the story. If one can visualize the scenes (and not everyone does this), then as one is drawn into the story and the mind- pictures, the mind is transported into the story world; reflective self-awareness and sense of time disappear into Flow.

* * *

THIS DOCUMENT IS HEREBY PLACED IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN

P.S. I advise you to share this information only with close friends and trusted allies. It would be most unfortunate if, for example, one's enemies solved the problem of Mondays.

THE END
